# credit-fraud-detection

Credit card fraud has been on the rise in the United States. Almost 450 million records containing personal data were exposed through data breaches in 2018. With nearly 160,000 reports, credit card fraud was the biggest type of identity theft last year and has almost tripled between 2014 and 2018. Point-to-sale malware is a widely used way that enables payment card fraud. POS malware hunts for credit card data that includes the owner's full name, billing address, expiration date, and card verification value (CVV) numbers. This information very briefly becomes available in unencrypted format in a device's memory, and POS malware gathers it instantly once the unencrypted data is detected. The stolen data is then sent to the attacker's computer or server. Over the years, various high-profile retail, hotel and restaurant chains have suffered significant losses due to POS malware infections. Here are some that you may know about, or that may have personally affected you. In 2017, Sabre Corp breach 's online reservation system was infected with a POS malware variant that put its clients and consumers at risk of financial and identity theft. Because Sabre Corp provided reservation services to clients that include Hard Rock and Lowes Hotels, this incident put them at risk as well. In 2018, POS terminals in more than 160 of Applebee breach’s branches were infected with POS malware, which put its customers at great risk of financial and identity theft. In 2019, POS terminals in 15% of Checkers' breach stores were infected with POS malware.

As much as small business owners would like to think their size does not make them a target for thieves, that simply isn't the case. Small businesses reported losing an average of $37,258 to card fraud last year. The reason why credit card fraud is so harmful to small businesses is that small firms bore the burdens of fraud at higher rates due to the typical magnitude of the losses incurred per incident. Furthermore, these organizations may lack the funding to implement the latest credit card fraud detection processors such as the EMV chip systems that could deter, hinder or catch bad actors. When combined with their tendency to overlook anti-fraud practices, this lack of defensive resources renders small enterprises vulnerable to credit card fraud.

Why data analytics and machine learning is useful in credit card fraud detection? In Machine Learning, problems like fraud detection are usually framed as classification problems —predicting a discrete class label output given a data observation. Talking about credit card payment fraud detection, the classification problem involves creating models that have enough intelligence to properly classify transactions as either legit or fraudulent, based on transaction details such as amount, merchant, location, time and others. Credit card fraud still amounts to considerable amounts of money. Hackers and crooks around the world are always looking into new ways of committing financial fraud at each minute. Relying exclusively on rule-based, conventionally programmed systems for detecting financial fraud would not provide the appropriate time-to-market. This is where Machine Learning shines as a unique solution for this type of problem.

The main challenge when it comes to modeling fraud detection as a classification problem comes from the fact that in real-world data, the majority of transactions are not fraudulent. Investment in technology for fraud detection has increased over the years so this shouldn’t be a surprise, but this brings us a problem: imbalanced data. Our dataset contains transactions made by credit cards in September 2013 by European cardholders. This dataset presents transactions that occurred in two days, where we have 492 frauds out of 284,807 transactions. The dataset is highly imbalanced, with the positive class (frauds) accounting for 0.172% of all transactions. The fastest, straightforward way to proceed in this case would be predicting that 100% of all cases are not fraudulent. Accuracy, in this case, would still be 99% when simulating past years. Not bad, right? But this “high” accuracy is not meaningful at all. Bottom line is that prediction would have no value. 

We use undersampling to deal with imbalanced data here. In this scenario, our subsample will be a dataframe with a 50/50 ratio of fraud transactions. There are 492 cases of fraud in our dataset so we can randomly get 492 cases of non-fraud to create our new sub dataframe. We combine the 492 cases of fraud and non-fraud, creating a new sub-sample.
